---
layout: post
title: "Rust and WASM - Game of Life"
date:   2020-12-30 12:30:00 -0500
categories: rust
---

I started learning Rust a while ago, when I was trying to get a handle
on OS development. I followed along with 
[Philipp Oppermann's blog](https://os.phil-opp.com/) but quickly put Rust
aside for C and the [osdev wiki](https://wiki.osdev.org/Expanded_Main_Page).

I wanted to come back to Rust and, while I was here, learn WebAssembly too.
A side project of mine recently ran up against [yul](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/smart-contracts/languages/#yul)
which has a very wasm-like syntax (I believe it can target either eWASM or
the EVM), so two-birds-one-scone.

I did the [Rustlings course using CLion with the Rust plugin and EduTools plugin](https://blog.jetbrains.com/education/2019/12/19/rustlings-course-adaptation/)
first, then finally dove into the [rust-wasm](https://rustwasm.github.io/docs/book/introduction.html)
tutorial. The tutorial walks you through implementing Conway's Game of Life
in Rust, building it for WebAssembly, and interacting with it through Javascript.
It was pretty fun, I highly recommend giving it a try.

Anyway, here's the interactive Game of Life. I ended up using `FixedBitSet`
for the cells, from one of the optional tutorial exercises. The slider controls
the game speed and you can click any cell to toggle it. Press Play (▶) to start!

<style>
#fps {
    white-space: pre;
    font-family: monospace;
}
#game-of-life {
    position: absolute;
    top: 0;
    left: 0;
    width: 100%;
    height: 100%;
    display: flex;
    flex-direction: column;
    align-items: center;
    justify-content: center;
}
.Row {
    display: table;
    margin-left: auto;
    margin-right: auto;
    width: 100%;
    table-layout: fixed;
    border-spacing: 10px;
    align-items: center;
    justify-content: center;
    position: absolute;
    text-align: center;
}
.buttons {
    height: 30px;
}
.slider {
    width: 270px;
    display: block;
}
</style>

<noscript>This page contains webassembly and javascript content, please enable javascript in your browser.</noscript>
<div id="game-of-life">
    <canvas id="game-of-life-canvas"></canvas>
    <div class="Row">
        <button class="buttons" id="play-pause">▶</button>
        <button class="buttons" id="random">Randomize</button>
        <button class="buttons" id="clear">Clear</button>
    </div>
    <input type="range" id="tick-range" min="0" max="100" value="5" class="slider post-content e-content">
    <div id="fps"></div>
    <script src="./bootstrap.js"></script>
</div>
