---
layout: post
title: "Never Stop Reading: Crashing the HaikuOS Port of Cave Story"
date:   2022-07-17 00:00:00 -0500
categories: identity
tags: [haiku, c, exploit, bggp]
---

**TL;DR:** Cave Story for HaikuOS go SEGV.

## BGGP3

The Binary Golf Grand Prix is an annual competition (three years now, that
counts) where you Golf (do fun stuff to) Binary files. The first year had
people create tiny ambigram binaries. The second year involved polyglots.  This
year's Binary Golf Grand Prix (BGGP3) is all about finding tiny crashes. We
want to find the smallest possible input to a program that will crash it and,
ideally, let us take over control flow.[^bggp3]

At around the same time BGGP3 was announced, a friend of mine mentioned that
Cave Story had been ported to HaikuOS[^csru]. I thought aloud, "wouldn't it be
hilarious to find a tiny crash in the Cave Story port to HaikuOS?" And so it
was. I ended up finding a crash in both the HaikuOS version (the original
`NXEngine`), and the version that gets bundled into most Linux distributions
(`nxengine-evo`).

[^bggp3]: [https://tmpout.sh/bggp/3/](https://tmpout.sh/bggp/3/)
[^csru]: [https://exlmoto.ru/nxengine/](https://exlmoto.ru/nxengine/)

## Fuzzing Cave Story

The first step was to find an appropriate source and sink in Cave Story to
target with fuzzing. By playing the game a little bit and downloading a local
copy of the source code, I decided to use the `player.dat` savegame files as an
input, with the target being the `profile_load` function which parses and loads
the profile files. To hit this function directly, I simply modified the start
of the `main` function in `main.cpp` to attempt to load any profile we pass in
on the command line.

```c
#include "profile.h"
#include "profile.fdh"

int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    Profile p;
    profile_load(argv[1], &p);
    return 0;
```

Next, I created `afi/` and `afo/` folders for AFL++ to store input and output
files, respectively. I copied some of the legitimate `profile.dat` files into
`afi/` and let it run with `afl-fuzz -t 5000 -n -i afi -o afo ./nx @@`. This
just happened to be the format of the `afl-fuzz` command most recently in my
history, I can't even remember what the options all mean. I didn't expect this
to work, but it found several crashes almost immediately.

## Analyzing the Crash(es)

There were two crashes found, a 60 byte crash (the "large" crash) and an 8 byte
crash (the "small" crash). I'll be using the source code from the original
NXEngine to demonstrate, but the vulnerable `profile_load` function is the same
in both the `NXEngine` and `nxengine-evo` repositories.

### The Large Crash (60 bytes)

[Download Here](/download/profile.dat_60byte)

Let's start with the large crash, since it's more robust. The beginning of the
file, the `Do041220` string, is a magic value that the loader uses to determine
if this is even a valid `profile.dat` save file. We can go ahead and ignore all
the intermediary bytes up until that last `0x5C`.

```
00000000: 446f 3034 3132 3230 0d00 0000 0800 0000  Do041220........
00000010: 2de6 0100 20e0 0000 0200 0000 0300 0000  -... ...........
00000020: 0300 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000  ................
00000030: 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 005c            ...........\
```

Let's look at the original section of the code that loads the player's weapons
from this file. As you can see, there's a `u32` that gets read from the file
and stored in the `int type`. This ends up being our `0x5C` value, but as a
little endian `u32`, thus it gets read as `0x5C000000`. Further down, when we
try to access `file->weapons[type]` we end up trying to write to a memory
location way out of bounds, and we segfault.

```c
// load weapons
fseek(fp, PF_WEAPONS_OFFS, SEEK_SET);
for(i=0;i<MAX_WPN_SLOTS;i++)
{
	int type = fgetl(fp);
	if (!type) break;
	
	int level = fgetl(fp);
	int xp = fgetl(fp);
	int maxammo = fgetl(fp);
	int ammo = fgetl(fp);
	
	file->weapons[type].hasWeapon = true;
	file->weapons[type].level = (level - 1);
	file->weapons[type].xp = xp;
	file->weapons[type].ammo = ammo;
	file->weapons[type].maxammo = maxammo;
	
	if (i == curweaponslot)
	{
		file->curWeapon = type;
	}
}
```

### The Small Crash (8 bytes)

[Download Here](/download/profile.dat_8byte)

This crash isn't as reliable, but I think it's more fun. I can only replicate
this crash in the original NXEngine version of the code, and only if calling
`profile_load` directly from `main`. It won't work if we let the game launch
normally and pick up the corrupt `profile.dat` file. As you can see, this crash
file consists of _only_ the magic value.

```
00000000: 446f 3034 3132 3230                      Do041220
```

How does this lead to a crash? Easy! The original code doesn't do any end of
file checking or error checking when reading the `profile.dat` file. When this
file is loaded, the `fgeti` and `fgetl` wrappers start returning random garbage
stack values instead. This is likely why the crash is inconsistent. For
whatever reason, when invoking the function directly, the garbage returned by
`fgeti` and `fgetl` leads to a crash, similar to the large crash, with a large
positive or negative `type` value. When loading the profile normally, it only
reads null bytes, which doesn't cause a crash, until the parser fails and
rejects the file because of a lack of secondary magic value (the string "FLAG")
further down in the file.

If we allow execution of this small crash to proceed until `fgetl` is called to
determine `type`, we can see the following in `gdb`.

```gdb
(gdb) info locals
value = 32767

(gdb) p &value
$1 = (uint32_t *) 0x7fffffffc594
```

If we dump memory at that address, we see it's just whatever garbage was
previously on the stack there.

```
(gdb) x/16bx &value
0x7fffffffc594:	0xff	0x7f	0x00	0x00	0x00	0x27	0x5f	0x5e
0x7fffffffc59c:	0xaa	0x5b	0x49	0x7c	0x00	0xdf	0x55	0x55
```

Absent of any checks, the `fgetl` and `fgeti` functions just return information
off the stack. I'm speculating here, but this could be used as a memory leak
which could be combined with the arbitrary write in the weapon slots to do some
fun stuff, maybe.

## Fixing the Crash

Check for fread results in fgeti and fgetl

First off, we check the results of the `fread` call and use that to determine
if we should bail early. If we hit an error or end of file when we don't expect
it? Just stop trying to parse the file. Nothing good can come of it. In the
below example, you see we check that the amount of data read from the file is
what we expect and if not, we error out.

```c
uint32_t fgetl(FILE *fp)
{
    uint32_t value;
    int ret = fread(&value, 4, 1, fp);
    if (ret != 1) {
        staterr("fgetl: error reading uint32_t from file");
        fclose(fp);
        exit(0);
    } else {
        return value;
    }
}
```

Next, we want to make sure the weapon type is something we expect before we
start blinding writing memory. The fix here is to check if `type` is within the
bounds of `MAX_WPN_SLOTS` and, if not, skip it. I didn't include any logic to
keep chewing through the file, so it's possible a corrupted save will cause the
file to get off by one byte, which would cause the wrong thing to be loaded.
But it shouldn't crash anymore, so that's probably fine.

```c
for(i=0;i<MAX_WPN_SLOTS;i++)
{
    int type = fgetl(fp);
    if (!type) break;
    if (type < 0 || type >= MAX_WPN_SLOTS) {
        staterr("profile_load: invalid weapon type %d", type);
        break;
    }
```

## Tallying the Score

So we have two scores here, I'd say. One for the large crash (that works out of
the box on the current package for both Linux and HaikuOS) and the other,
smaller, crash which takes some luck to get going.

### Large Crash

*  +4096 - 60 = +4036 points for the binary size
*  +1024 writeup
*  +4096 patches merged ([^pr1], [^pr2], [^pr3], [^pr4])

**Total: 9156**

### Small Crash

*  +4096 - 8 = +4088
*  +1024 writeup
*  +4096 patches merged

**Total: 9208**

### Do I win?

The small crash probably doesn't count, and I don't know if crashing the Cave
Story port on HaikuOS is more or less comical than crashing GnuCOBOL, so I may
need another way to beat Remy's score of 9176.[^remirino]

# References

[^pr1]: [https://github.com/EXL/NXEngine/pull/9](https://github.com/EXL/NXEngine/pull/9)
[^pr2]: [https://github.com/nxengine/nxengine-evo/pull/272](https://github.com/nxengine/nxengine-evo/pull/272)
[^pr3]: [https://github.com/nxengine/nxengine-evo/pull/273](https://github.com/nxengine/nxengine-evo/pull/273)
[^pr4]: [https://github.com/EXL/NXEngine/pull/10](https://github.com/EXL/NXEngine/pull/10)
[^remirino]: [https://remyhax.xyz/posts/bggp3-cob/](https://remyhax.xyz/posts/bggp3-cob/)

